# Unsupervised Learning

Unsupervised learning, also known as unsupervised machine learning, uses machine learning algorithms to analyze and cluster unlabeled datasets. These algorithms discover hidden patterns or data groupings without the need for human intervention. Its ability to discover similarities and differences in information make it the ideal solution for exploratory data analysis, cross-selling strategies, customer segmentation, and image recognition.

### Common unsupervised learning approaches
**Clustering**
Clustering is a data mining technique which groups unlabeled data based on their similarities or differences. Clustering algorithms are used to process raw, unclassified data objects into groups represented by structures or patterns in the information. Clustering algorithms can be categorized into a few types, specifically exclusive, overlapping, hierarchical, and probabilistic.

- K-means clustering is a common example of an exclusive clustering method where data points are assigned into K groups, where K represents the number of clusters based on the distance from each group’s centroid. The data points closest to a given centroid will be clustered under the same category. A larger K value will be indicative of smaller groupings with more granularity whereas a smaller K value will have larger groupings and less granularity. K-means clustering is commonly used in market segmentation, document clustering, image segmentation, and image compression.

**Dimensionality reduction**
While more data generally yields more accurate results, it can also impact the performance of machine learning algorithms (e.g. overfitting) and it can also make it difficult to visualize datasets. Dimensionality reduction is a technique used when the number of features, or dimensions, in a given dataset is too high. It reduces the number of data inputs to a manageable size while also preserving the integrity of the dataset as much as possible. It is commonly used in the preprocessing data stage, and there are a few different dimensionality reduction methods that can be used, such as:

- Principal component analysis (PCA) is a type of dimensionality reduction algorithm which is used to reduce redundancies and to compress datasets through feature extraction. This method uses a linear transformation to create a new data representation, yielding a set of "principal components." The first principal component is the direction which maximizes the variance of the dataset. While the second principal component also finds the maximum variance in the data, it is completely uncorrelated to the first principal component, yielding a direction that is perpendicular, or orthogonal, to the first component. This process repeats based on the number of dimensions, where a next principal component is the direction orthogonal to the prior components with the most variance.

### Unsupervised vs. supervised vs. semi-supervised learning
Unsupervised learning and supervised learning are frequently discussed together. Unlike unsupervised learning algorithms, supervised learning algorithms use labeled data. From that data, it either predicts future outcomes or assigns data to specific categories based on the regression or classification problem that it is trying to solve. While supervised learning algorithms tend to be more accurate than unsupervised learning models, they require upfront human intervention to label the data appropriately. However, these labelled datasets allow supervised learning algorithms to avoid computational complexity as they don’t need a large training set to produce intended outcomes. Common regression and classification techniques are linear and logistic regression, naïve bayes, KNN algorithm, and random forest.

Semi-supervised learning occurs when only part of the given input data has been labelled. Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning can be more appealing alternatives as it can be time-consuming and costly to rely on domain expertise to label data appropriately for supervised learning.

### Reference
IBM Cloud Education. (n.d.). What is unsupervised learning? IBM. Retrieved May 2, 2023, from https://www.ibm.com/topics/unsupervised-learning#:~:text=the%20next%20step-,What%20is%20unsupervised%20learning%3F,the%20need%20for%20human%20intervention.